README.md, before:

docker-otbr-tcp
===============

This repository provides tools to run a dockerized OpenThread Border Router that uses a network-attached radio "Thread stick", such as the SMLIGHT models
(https://smlight.tech/).

OpenThread Border Router (OTBR) requires a device file to be passed to its agent. The Home Assistant add-on introduced the ability to use "socat" to create a
local socket and connect it with a remote TCP socket. However, that add-on is only usable in Home Assistant OS. This Docker image uses the same concept for
standard Docker installations.

Building the image
==================

Clone this repository and change to its working directory, then run the Docker build:
```
git clone https://github.com/bnutzer/docker-otbr-tcp.git
cd docker-otbr-tcp
docker build -t otbr-tcp .
```

Configuration
=============

OTBR in this image can be configured by setting environment variables (see below for usage). These variables are currently available:

| Component | Variable | Default | Description |
|-----------|----------|---------|-------------|
| global | OTBR_LOG_LEVEL_INT | 6 | Log level for OTBR (6 = info) |
| rcp | RCP_USE_TCP | 1 | This image can also use a local (USB) Thread stick by setting this variable to 0 (and setting the TTY to your USB device) |
| rcp | RCP_HOST | (n/a) | The hostname or IP of your radio device |
| rcp | RCP_PORT | 6638 | Port of your radio device. 6638 is the default for SMLIGHT devices |
| rcp | RCP_TTY | /tmp/ttyOTBR | For TCP mode, socat and agent use this as their shared socket. Point to your USB device for local radio |
| rcp | SOCAT_SOURCE_PARAMETERS | ,raw,echo=0,wait-slave,ignoreeof | Additional arguments to the local socket configuration for socat |
| rcp | SOCAT_DESTINATION_PARAMETERS | ,nodelay,keepalive,forever,interval=5 | Additional arguments to the remote socket configuration for socat |
| agent | RCP_BAUDRATE | 460800 | Communication baud rate for the radio. The default is the maximum; reduce by factors of 2 or 4 for increased stability |
| agent | SOCAT_STARTUP_GRACE_PERIOD | 2 | Additional wait time to allow socat to contact the radio |
| agent | OTBR_REST_LISTEN_ADDRESS | 0.0.0.0 | Local address for OTBR REST interface. 0.0.0.0 is public. IPv6 options not yet explored |
| agent | OTBR_REST_LISTEN_PORT | 8081 | Port of OTBR REST interface |
| agent, web | OTBR_THREAD_IF | wpan0 | TUN device created and used by OTBR. Set to a different device for running multiple instances |
| agent | OTBR_BACKBONE_IF | eth0 | Local network device |
| agent | OTBR_RCP_ADDITIONAL_ARGS | &uart-flow-control | RCP arguments to pass to OTBR. Default enables flow control |
| agent | OTBR_SERVICEBASENAME | | Set service base name of router. Defaults to "OpenThread BR (unspecified vendor)" and will be appended an identifier |
| backup | OTBR_BACKUP_INTERVAL | 600 | Dataset backup interval in seconds |
| web | OTBR_WEB_ENABLE | 0 | Enable OTBR web interface by setting this value to "1" |
| web | OTBR_WEB_PORT | 8080 | Port for web interface |
| web | OTBR_WEB_LISTEN_ADDRESS | 0.0.0.0 | Local listening address for web interface |

Running the image
=================

The only mandatory configuration variable is "RCP_HOST"; the defaults work fine for many cases.

## Using Docker

```bash
docker run -e RCP_HOST=SLZB-06M.local --rm otbr-tcp
```

## Using Docker Compose

OTBR might commonly be run on the same machine running Home Assistant. This is a sample docker-compose.yml:

```yaml
services:
  otbr:
    image: otbr-tcp
    network_mode: host
    restart: unless-stopped
    privileged: true
    cap_drop:
      - NET_ADMIN   # Should prevent iptables/ipset updates
      - NET_RAW     # No raw network access
    devices:
      - /dev/net/tun
    environment:
      - RCP_HOST=SLZB-06M.local
```

Then run:
```bash
docker compose up -d otbr
```

Dataset Backup and Restore
==========================

Some devices (including the SMLIGHT SLZB-06M) may not stay in a Thread mesh after a service restart. To mitigate this issue, the device's dataset can be backed up regularly, allowing a restore during the startup phase.
As of now, this behavior cannot be disabled. Use the source if you need to modify this!

When you configured this otbr to join a network (e.g., using Home Assistant), either create a backup manually, or
wait for the container to create its first backup.

The "otbr-dataset.sh" script will also initiate the basic thread configuration if no backup is found.

License
=======

These Docker image build files are licensed under the MIT license. See the LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

Remove otbr dataset backup/restore scripts
Using a persistent volume for otbr's data is well enough to provide persistent
datasets and ids. The backup/restore scripts no longer provide any purpose.

README.md, after:

docker-otbr-tcp
===============

This repository provides tools to run a dockerized OpenThread Border Router that uses a network-attached radio "Thread stick", such as the SMLIGHT models
(https://smlight.tech/).

OpenThread Border Router (OTBR) requires a device file to be passed to its agent. The Home Assistant add-on introduced the ability to use "socat" to create a
local socket and connect it with a remote TCP socket. However, that add-on is only usable in Home Assistant OS. This Docker image uses the same concept for
standard Docker installations.

Despite its name, the image also supports local (USB-attached) thread sticks.

Using docker hub image
======================
The image is published to docker hub for arm64 and x86_64 architectures. You can find it
[on docker hub as bnutzer/otbr-tcp](https://hub.docker.com/r/bnutzer/otbr-tcp).

New images are built weekly. As the upstream image [openthread/otbr](https://hub.docker.com/r/openthread/otbr)
does not provide any meaningful versioning, this image is published as "latest" as well. I cannot guarantee
the latest tag to always provide a stable version.

Building the image
==================

Clone this repository and change to its working directory, then run the Docker build:
```
git clone https://github.com/bnutzer/docker-otbr-tcp.git
cd docker-otbr-tcp
docker build -t otbr-tcp .
```

Configuration
=============

OTBR in this image can be configured by setting environment variables (see below for usage). These variables are currently available:

| Component | Variable | Default | Description |
|-----------|----------|---------|-------------|
| global | OTBR_LOG_LEVEL_INT | 6 | Log level for OTBR (6 = info) |
| rcp | RCP_USE_TCP | 1 | This image can also use a local (USB) Thread stick by setting this variable to 0 (and setting the TTY to your USB device) |
| rcp | RCP_HOST | (n/a) | The hostname or IP of your radio device |
| rcp | RCP_PORT | 6638 | Port of your radio device. 6638 is the default for SMLIGHT devices |
| rcp | RCP_TTY | /tmp/ttyOTBR | For TCP mode, socat and agent use this as their shared socket. Point to your USB device for local radio |
| rcp | SOCAT_SOURCE_PARAMETERS | ,raw,echo=0,wait-slave,ignoreeof | Additional arguments to the local socket configuration for socat |
| rcp | SOCAT_DESTINATION_PARAMETERS | ,nodelay,keepalive,forever,interval=5 | Additional arguments to the remote socket configuration for socat |
| agent | RCP_BAUDRATE | 460800 | Communication baud rate for the radio. The default is the maximum; reduce by factors of 2 or 4 for increased stability |
| agent | SOCAT_STARTUP_GRACE_PERIOD | 2 | Additional wait time to allow socat to contact the radio |
| agent | OTBR_REST_LISTEN_ADDRESS | 0.0.0.0 | Local address for OTBR REST interface. 0.0.0.0 is public. IPv6 options not yet explored |
| agent | OTBR_REST_LISTEN_PORT | 8081 | Port of OTBR REST interface |
| agent, web | OTBR_THREAD_IF | wpan0 | TUN device created and used by OTBR. Set to a different device for running multiple instances |
| agent | OTBR_BACKBONE_IF | eth0 | Local network device |
| agent | OTBR_RCP_ADDITIONAL_ARGS | &uart-flow-control | RCP arguments to pass to OTBR. Default enables flow control |
| agent | OTBR_SERVICEBASENAME | | Set service base name of router. Defaults to "OpenThread BR (unspecified vendor)" and will be appended an identifier |
| backup | OTBR_BACKUP_INTERVAL | 600 | Dataset backup interval in seconds |
| web | OTBR_WEB_ENABLE | 0 | Enable OTBR web interface by setting this value to "1" |
| web | OTBR_WEB_PORT | 8080 | Port for web interface |
| web | OTBR_WEB_LISTEN_ADDRESS | 0.0.0.0 | Local listening address for web interface |

Running the image
=================

The only mandatory configuration variable is "RCP_HOST"; the defaults work fine for many cases.

## Using Docker

```bash
docker run -e RCP_HOST=SLZB-06M.local -v ./otbr-data:/var/lib/thread --rm otbr-tcp
```

## Using Docker Compose

OTBR might commonly be run on the same machine running Home Assistant. This is a sample docker-compose.yml:

```yaml
services:
  otbr:
    image: otbr-tcp
    network_mode: host
    restart: unless-stopped
    privileged: true
    cap_drop:
      - NET_ADMIN   # Should prevent iptables/ipset updates
      - NET_RAW     # No raw network access
    devices:
      - /dev/net/tun
    environment:
      - RCP_HOST=SLZB-06M.local
    volumes:
      - ./otbr-data:/var/lib/thread
```

Then run:
```bash
docker compose up -d otbr
```

Dataset management
==================

OpenThread Border Router maintains its state in files in `/var/lib/thread`. This state includes an identifier, and the dataset.
Using a persistent volume for these data will help your router to stay in its Thread mesh.

Initial early versions of this image provided a backup/restore mechanism to accomplish persistence. That was an emergency solution, and
the `otbr-dataset.sh` script has been removed from this image.

License
=======

These Docker image build files are licensed under the MIT license. See the LICENSE file for details.
